README.md, before:

# Ocean markdown-it

[Ocean markdown-it] library is a wrapper for [markdown-it] built to render Ocean-flavored markdown (OFM).

[Ocean markdown-it]: https://github.com/dnotes/ocean-markdown-it
[commonmark specification]: https://spec.commonmark.org/0.29/
[markdown-it]: https://github.com/markdown-it/markdown-it

## Installation

`npm install ocean-markdown-it` or  
`yarn add ocean-markdown-it`

## Usage

Ocean Markdown IT can be used as an inline replacement for [markdown-it]. The module exports an instance of markdown-it that has been created with all of the configuration and plugins necessary for supporting OFM.

``` javascript
const md = require('ocean-markdown-it')
html = md.render('# This is Ocean-flavored markdown {.title}')
console.log(html) // <h1 class="title">This is Ocean-flavored markdown</h1>
```

# Ocean-flavored Markdown

Ocean-flavored markdown is an expanded subset of the [commonmark specification] optimized for literary texts. In the few conditions under which [markdown-it] diverges from commonmark, OFM follows the markdown-it implementation.

Commit message:

added all current specs to spec.md

README.md, after:

# Ocean markdown-it

[Ocean markdown-it] is a wrapper for [markdown-it] built to render Ocean-flavored Markdown ([OFM]).

## Installation

`npm install ocean-markdown-it` or  
`yarn add ocean-markdown-it`

## Usage

Ocean markdown-it can be used as an inline replacement for [markdown-it]. The module exports an instance of markdown-it that has been created with all of the configuration and plugins necessary for properly rendering OFM.

``` javascript
const md = require('ocean-markdown-it')
html = md.render('# This is Ocean-flavored markdown {.title}')
console.log(html) // <h1 class="title">This is Ocean-flavored markdown</h1>
```

# Ocean-flavored Markdown (OFM)

Markdown is a widely-used convention for writing for the web, useful because it is easy and quick to write and creates a readable text document that converts well to HTML. The [Markdown] website has a good introduction for people who may find it unfamiliar. Ocean-flavored Markdown is an extension of this syntax designed to support literature. The specification is detailed at [spec.md].

[Ocean markdown-it]: https://github.com/dnotes/ocean-markdown-it
[Commonmark spec]: https://spec.commonmark.org/0.29/
[markdown-it]: https://github.com/markdown-it/markdown-it
[Markdown]: https://daringfireball.net/markdown
[OFM]: #ocean-flavored-markdown-ofm
[spec.md]: https://github.com/dnotes/ocean-markdown-it/blob/master/spec.md
